_drafts/hp.markdown, before:

---
title: HP
date: 2019-06-03 22:22:00 Z
---

## Summary

The concept of Health Power ( or Points, if that's what you grew up with ) are  an intrinsitc part of RPG games fo all flavours, largely thanks to DnD. As a meas

## Critique

### Unrealism

Despite all the conveniences of HP as a measure of progress, it also presents problems. In DnD, taking a blow from an enemy casues to effect other than a number going down, until the last: at whch point characters suddenly feel the blow and crumple. It's one of the 'gamiest' mechanics in the game, and stands out against a range of others that require a level of nuance, context and imagination: in DnD, you're either up and fighting at full capacity, or down, with no in between.

Unlike a lot of rules in DnD, HP has almost no relation to how creatures and humans operate in the real world An actual combat situation is both fast and deadly: the first connecting blow is most often the last, as injury causes crippling pain, a loss of mobility and reduction in our capacity to perform. The combat performance of most fighters is radically reduces from even minor injuries, let alone mutiple sword blows. And lets not even touch the suvject of how healing interacts with HP, where an unconcious PC can jump into fighting form with a single point of healing, as though nothing had happened.

A common fix for those who are bothered by this is to apply a layer of narrative to explain away the wierdness. You could view HP as a measure of stamina, each blow chipping away at your will to resist damage. You could see it as pain threshold, beyond which you are unable to ignore blows. It could be a magical shield, where losing it causes actual injury.  HP could be considered your awareness in combat, and reaching zero means you've run out of luck and the next blow actually connecting. There's lots of ways to do it, but all are undone by DnD's very specific attack and armour system; successfully getting through an enemy's defenses means explicitly dealing damage, destroying any illusions.   

There's been a long history of homebrew rules and on how to make the relatively binary HP system more varied and realistic. These include:

* Introducing the 'bloodied' status, which gives characters additional effects when at half HP.
* Limb damage systems, which apply different afflictions depending on where you land a hit
* Fatigue and stamina systems, where HP represents your capacity to endure blows, until it reaches low levels and attacks cause deadly damage
* Modified Death Saves: instead of being knocked out or killed, reaching 0 HP just means you are winded, thrown around the battlefield or otherwise unable to contribute for  while, until you make a save to recover.

Unfortunately of these add complexity on what is already a pretty basic system; the opposite of what we want.  Instead we'll be looking to reduce the complexity even further, and hopefully bringing the concept of taking damage closer to reality in the process.  


###

## Demake

The demake here is to reduce damage dealt by an order of magnitude, and round all sources of damage to 1 or to points. This extends to HP as well as damage, meaning instead of a healthpool.

This is also an opportunity to remove HP scaling from progression in the game, which

Note: this is a pretty big change, and implementing it means a big shift in focus in combat from maximising damage to maximising chance to hit. Re-implementing HP and damage into your game may cause more confusion than than normal for players who've gotten comfortable with the Demake style of play.

## Rules

* PCs have HP equal to 1 plus their Constitution modifier. They cannot have HP below 1.
* Classes with D10 hit die gain +2 HP.
* Classes with D8 hit die gain +1 HP.

## DM rules

* Creatures have HP equal to their Challenge Rating.
* Traps deal the following amount of damage:
  * Setback - 1 HP
  * Dangerous - 3 HP
  * Deadly - 5 HP

Commit message:

Hp, damage and level scaling

_drafts/hp.markdown, after:

---
title: HP
date: 2019-06-03 22:22:00 Z
---

## Summary

The concept of Health Power ( or Points, if that's what you grew up with ) are  a core part of RPG games of all flavours, largely thanks to DnD.

## Critique

### Unrealism

Despite all the conveniences of HP as a measure of progress, it also presents problems. In DnD, taking a blow from an enemy casues to effect other than a number going down, until the last: at whch point characters suddenly feel the blow and crumple. It's one of the 'gamiest' mechanics in the game, and stands out against a range of others that require a level of nuance, context and imagination: in DnD, you're either up and fighting at full capacity, or down, with no in between.

Unlike a lot of rules in DnD, HP has almost no relation to how creatures and humans operate in the real world An actual combat situation is both fast and deadly: the first connecting blow is most often the last, as injury causes crippling pain, a loss of mobility and reduction in our capacity to perform. The combat performance of most fighters is radically reduces from even minor injuries, let alone mutiple sword blows. And lets not even touch the suvject of how healing interacts with HP, where an unconcious PC can jump into fighting form with a single point of healing, as though nothing had happened.

A common fix for those who are bothered by this is to apply a layer of narrative to explain away the wierdness. You could view HP as a measure of stamina, each blow chipping away at your will to resist damage. You could see it as pain threshold, beyond which you are unable to ignore blows. It could be a magical shield, where losing it causes actual injury.  HP could be considered your awareness in combat, and reaching zero means you've run out of luck and the next blow actually connecting. There's lots of ways to do it, but all are undone by DnD's very specific attack and armour system; successfully getting through an enemy's defenses means explicitly dealing damage, destroying any illusions.   

There's been a long history of homebrew rules and on how to make the relatively binary HP system more varied and realistic. These include:

* Introducing the 'bloodied' status, which gives characters additional effects when at half HP.
* Limb damage systems, which apply different afflictions depending on where you land a hit
* Fatigue and stamina systems, where HP represents your capacity to endure blows, until it reaches low levels and attacks cause deadly damage
* Modified Death Saves: instead of being knocked out or killed, reaching 0 HP just means you are winded, thrown around the battlefield or otherwise unable to contribute for  while, until you make a save to recover.

Unfortunately of these add complexity on what is already a pretty basic system; the opposite of what we want.  Instead we'll be looking to reduce the complexity even further, and hopefully bringing the concept of taking damage closer to reality in the process.  

## Demake

The demake here is to reduce the complexity in dealing with granular HP and damage numbers. This is as simple as reducing everything by order of magnitude, and round all sources of damage to 1 or to points. This extends to HP as well as damage, meaning instead of a healthpool.

This is also an opportunity to remove HP scaling from progression in the game, which in most cases scales linearly with level, for no net effect. Instead HP and damage increases come from actual improvements in the skills and capabilities of characters. Read more in the Level Scaling post.

Note: this is a pretty big change, and implementing it means a big shift in focus in combat from maximising damage to maximising chance to hit. Re-implementing HP and damage into your game may cause more confusion than than normal for players who've gotten comfortable with the Demake style of play.

## Rules

* PCs have HP equal to 1 plus their Constitution modifier. They cannot have HP below 1.
* Classes with D10 hit die gain +2 HP.
* Classes with D8 hit die gain +1 HP.

## DM rules

* Creatures have HP equal to their Challenge Rating.
* Traps deal the following amount of damage:
  * Setback - 1 HP
  * Dangerous - 3 HP
  * Deadly - 5 HP

## Downsides
